TITLE: ADJUSTING TO 100 FAILED BANKS
DATE: 1985-11-16
GRAPHIC: Photo of the Northshore Bank in Houston; photo of sherif locking the door of the Early Savings Bank in Early, Iowa (AP)
PUBLICATION: The New York Times
LANGUAGE: ENGLISH
SECTION: Section 1; Page 35, Column 3; Financial Desk
DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 15
EDITION: 
LENGTH: 1938 words
DATE: 1985-11-16
SEARCH_ID: 11
For decades following the Great Depression, the collapse of a bank was a dreaded event that recalled the image of panicky depositors in front of padlocked bank branches.

But times have changed. When Federal regulators closed the doors of the Northshore Bank of Houston last week, no lines formed, no one's funds were frozen and the news was taken in stride by the banking system.

And yet that was the 100th bank to fail this year, the highest number since 1933. Moreover, another 30 are expected to collapse by the end of the year, and 1,100 of the nation's 14,500 commercial banks are judged to be either near insolvency or in trouble.

At another time and another place, of course, the specter of so many failed banks could have shaken the foundations of the financial world. But nowadays, the demise of a number of banks in any given year is viewed - by many bankers and regulators - as inevitable, and actually desirable, for the continued health of the industry.

A Free Market Industry

Indeed, many banking experts say the banking system of 1985 has become more akin to a typical free market industry, in which competition rules, the strong survive and the weak disappear. All of this has been brought about by the deregulation of interest rates in the late 1970's and the entrance of many more financial institutions into the traditional arena of banking.

''We are beginning to learn more and more that in a competitive system more institutions will disappear,'' said John G. Heiman, vice chairman of Merrill Lynch & Company and former Comptroller of the Currency. ''We are weeding out the poor managers and the weak institutions. And that is a good thing.''

Even so, there is still cause for concern. A high percentage of the banking industry is exposed, to some degree, to the troubled areas of the United States economy, such as agriculture, energy and commercial real estate, that led to the downfall of most of the 100 failed banks this year. And a recession could push many more over the brink.

Moreover, the system has not had to cope this year with the collapse of a major money center bank. Such a collapse might create a crisis of confidence at other major institutions, where large depositors might then withdraw money that is not insured by the Government above $100,000. It is that Federal backing that has cushioned the blow for many depositors of the banks that have failed so far.

So far, however, the freedom to fail has not applied to the big money center banks. The Federal Government stepped in and bailed out the Continental Illinois Bank and Trust Company last year, and banking experts expect regulators to do the same if another giant bank teeters.

Regulators and bankers, who are very reticent to talk about potential problems, are closely watching the trouble spots. They are working to contain the problems through more extensive examinations, and know that in today's riskier banking environment problems can arise almost overnight. Nevertheless, they still see no indication that a systemwide crisis exists.

''The banking system itself is incredibly strong and I don't see any problem around that is unmanageable,'' said Walter B. Wriston, former chairman of Citicorp. ''If you look at what we've gone through in recent years, never in history has a financial system sustained so many unforeseen shocks and ridden through with only minor casualties.''

To illustrate the free market vitality of the system, Mr. Wriston and others point to almost 400 new banks that were started in 1984, and predict that more than 500 will be chartered to open this year. ''At that rate, we can stand to lose 100 banks a year,'' Mr. Wriston said. ''It just shows that people think banking is a good business to be in these days.'' three-tenths of 1 percent of the $2.5 trillion in the nation's banking assets.

''Our failure rate is far below the national average for industry,'' said John Stone, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation's deputy director of examination.

Moreover, the fact that the failures have been concentrated in only a few industries has helped regulators contain the problem. Precisely half the failures have been agriculture banks - those with 25 percent of their loans to farmers and farm-related businesses. And another large portion has been banks lending primarily to energy businesses. Only three banks have failed in the Northeast.

In general, almost all the failed banks have been absorbed by larger, stronger institutions. No insured depositors have lost money, and, in almost every case, the banks have been closed on Fridays and opened the next Monday.

And perhaps the most important barometer of how the economy is absorbing the failures this year is the reaction from depositors, who seemed unconcerned, as long as their accounts are insured by the Federal Government for up to $100,000.

In October, when the Chase Manhattan Bank of New York bought three savings and loans in Maryland that had been closed for months, the new managers expected a run. They stocked up on coffee and doughnuts to accommodate the long lines. When Chase reopened the institutions - as fully insured commercial banks -the coffee got cold, the doughnuts got stale. Lines were short, and most customers deposited money. (Failed savings and loans come under the jurisdiction of the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation, and are not counted among the 100 bank failures this year.) Some Question U.S. Guarantees Some see problems with widespread guarantees by the Government, noting that it tends to encourage high risk-taking by the banks, since failure is at the Government's cost, not management's. As a result, regulators are pushing, and Congress is considering, assessing banks extra insurance premiums if they are engaged in risky lending practices.

The current rate of bank failures already has regulators harried. The F.D.I.C. has had to increase its liquidation team tenfold over the last four years, and has just budgeted an extra 300 spots for its 1,700-member bank examination force. Moreover, in an effort to insure that the current, rather confined, troubles do not spread, and infect the bigger institutions, the regulators have changed their examination procedure.

Both the Comptroller and the F.D.I.C. are examining the weakened banks with much greater regularity, at times giving historically healthy banks only minimal scrutiny. ''For some banks, we're in there all the time,'' H. Joe Selby, the Acting Comptroller, said recently. ''For other healthy banks, we often don't even do on-site examinations.''

For those banks that do fail, the impact is relatively minor, even within the local community. Bank stockholders are generally the only ones who lose. The 99th bank failure, on Friday, Nov. 8, was typical.

Because of excessive lending to farmers and farm-related businesses, the Auburn Savings Bank of Auburn, Iowa, with $6.8 million in deposits became insolvent, as depressed commodities and land prices made it impossible for farmers to repay their debts.

Auburn Savings was the 50th agricultural bank to go under this year. Acting along with the state banking commissioner, the F.D.I.C. shut it down, found a healthy acquiring bank - the Carroll County State Bank of Carroll, Iowa - and reopened Auburn this past Tuesday, as a branch of Carroll County. No depositors lost money. Business continued as normal, but under a different name. The death of a bank was quiet, swift and almost painless.

Indeed, the largest commercial bank failure of the year, according to the F.D.I.C., was a bank with $236 million in assets - the First National Bank of St. Joseph, Mo. And perhaps the most troublesome for the F.D.I.C. was the failure last summer of the $143 million Golden Pacific National Bank in New York's Chinatown, when a small riot almost erupted, as hundreds of customers were informed that funds that had placed in bank certificates were most likely not insured by the Government.

The F.D.I.C. also worked out the takeover of the $5.4 billion Bowery Savings Bank of New York on Oct. 1. Of the 100 bank failures this year, Bowery was the only mutual savings bank. Since the Bowery's problems were longstanding and well known, its sale did not worry regulators. In the 1960's, 4 Failures a Year Yet the sheer numbers of failures this year are staggering, if compared with recent history. Through the 1960's, an average of four banks a year failed. That number doubled to eight in the 1970's. And as recently as 1981, only 10 collapsed.

Banking experts trace the huge rise since to the effects of interest-rate deregulation, as banks no longer could pay 5.5 percent on the bulk of their deposits; rates were more closely tied to the market. Moreover, the new deregulatory climate led to so many failures that regulators could not afford to give banks as much time to work out problems.

Since 1981, losses to Government deposit insurance funds have also soared. The F.D.I.C. paid out $500 million to depositors of failed banks between 1934 and 1980. Since the beginning of 1981, failures have cost the fund more than $5 billion. But regulators and bankers still voice confidence, pointing to the fund's asset growth from $11 billion in 1980 to more than $19 billion today.

Nonetheless, there are some big clouds on the horizon.

''The fact is, banks are in less good shape now than 20 years ago,'' said Alan Greenspan, chairman of President Ford's Council of Economic Advisers and now head of Townsend-Greenspan & Company, an economic consulting firm in New York. ''Loan portfolios at commercial banks have declined in quality and capital levels are not high enough.''

In recent weeks, banking experts have begun voicing growing concern about certain sectors. In addition to the well-known agricultural and energy sector problems, and the ever-present exposure the banks have through almost $1 trillion in outstanding loans to third world countries, the nation's urban centers are greatly overbuilt and banks are carrying large real estate loans on their books.

''I understand there is the equivalent of 150 empty Empire State Buildings in 22 major urban centers around the country,'' said Donald I. Hovde, a member of the Federal Home Loan Bank Board.

And bankers are concerned over record levels of consumer debt. Some fear that if a recession were to hit, many consumers will default. Rivals Cut Into Core Business Moreover, the competition in the banking industry has increased exponentially in recent years. Insurance companies, brokerage firms, even savings and loan associations have plunged heavily into lending to finance business expansion - commercial banking's core business.

In addition, many of the nation's biggest and most creditworthy companies have begun raising their own funds at lower cost in the commerical paper market, Mr. Greenspan noted.

Finally, analysts point with unease to the heavy borrowing by corporate America in recent years to buy back shares from stockholders, either to defend companies against hostile takeovers or to accomplish a leveraged buyout and go private. This has saddled companies with very high levels of debt, and if interest rates rise again, or if the economy enters another recession, this could cause many companies to default on big payments to the nation's banks.

Albert M. Wojnilower, chief economist at the First Boston Corporation, said: ''Through deregulation, we have encouraged our economy to become more leveraged. Consumers are borrowing more, business is borrowing more. And it's like Pandora's box. We can't go back. But we have to learn to live with it.''
