TITLE: INDUSTRIAL OUTPUT UNCHANGED
DATE: 1985-11-16
GRAPHIC: Graph of industrial production (NYT/Nov. 16, 1985)
PUBLICATION: The New York Times
LANGUAGE: ENGLISH
SECTION: Section 1; Page 35, Column 6; Financial Desk
DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 15
EDITION: 
LENGTH: 860 words
DATE: 1985-11-16
TYPE: STATISTICS
SEARCH_ID: 13
The Government reported today that output at the nation's factories, mines and utilities failed to rise last month, disappointing analysts who had generally expected a modest advance.

The Federal Reserve's index of industrial production remained unchanged at 124.9, a level just 1.8 percent higher than in October 1984.

''We have a continued weak production picture here, a bit weaker than most people forecast,'' said Rudolf Thunberg, an economist at Ried, Thunberg & Company.

In another report, the Labor Department said that prices at the producer level spurted nine-tenths of 1 percent in October, the biggest jump in four and a half years. Some analysts said they detected in this some slight pickup in the inflation rate but others dismissed the rise as a one-month phenomenon that did not change the prospects for low inflation this year and next. [Page 36.] Special Circumstances Both the output and price figures, however, were influenced by special circumstances.

The White House, reacting to the fresh data as President Reagan prepared to leave for the summit meeting in Geneva, pointed also to the recent sharp stock market climb in which the Dow-Jones industrial average posted three closing records this week and declared: ''The pulse of the nation's economy remains strong and stable.'' It added that it still saw no signs that inflation would return to double-digit levels.

Industrial production was affected by strikes at the Chrysler Corporation and at some military equipment facilities, with automobile output falling about 6 percent to an annual rate of 7.6 million units.

Rise for Business Equipment

But the overall decline of six-tenths of 1 percent in durable goods was largely offset by production gains for nondurable consumer goods and there was also a small increase of three-tenths of 1 percent for business equipment.

Expectations that industrial output would show an increase of up to five-tenths of 1 percent were based on an exceptionally strong growth in October employment that was reported two weeks ago. A 414,000 rise in nonfarm payroll employment included what had been regarded as a heartening 60,000 upturn in manufacturing jobs. Factory jobs had declined by 330,000 between January and September.

''Some people overestimated the effect of the employment figures,'' said Martin J. Mauro, senior economist for Merrill Lynch Economics.

Mine production fell 1.4 percent in the month, the Federal Reserve reported, mainly reflecting cutbacks in coal and in oil and gas. Utility output eased two-tenths of 1 percent following a 1.8 percent rise in September.

''Industrial production is stagnating,'' said Walter K. Joelson, chief economist for the General Electric Company, ''dragging down the rest of the economy.'' He added that he was ''a lot more reserved'' about the outlook than the consensus forecast for a rise in the gross national product of about 2 to 3 percent in 1986.

Rise in Imported Goods

Mr. Joelson said that imports accounted for 10.5 percent of the American market for manufactured goods, up from 9.7 percent in 1984 and 6.8 percent five years ago and that the declining dollar had done virtually nothing so far to improve American competitiveness.

The jump in producer prices, meanwhile, was almost entirely the result of developments in automobiles and food.

More than half the nine-tenths increase for producer prices, as measured by the finished goods component, was the result of increases posted on the newly introduced 1986 models and the ending of some sales-incentive programs under which Detroit offered cut-rate financing.

Much of the rest reflected a 16.6 percent increase in livestock prices, the biggest monthly rise since July 1974. The department's companion index of crude goods, which includes food, jumped 3.1 percent, the biggest increase since August 1980. Moreover, the crude goods food and feedstuffs component soared 6.3 percent after falling for nine straight months.

Slight to Modest Pickup

While economists said there was no reason to be alarmed by the price increases, some suggested that they might be a harbinger of a slight to modest pickup in the general inflation rate. ''I wonder whether this is the beginning of a little bad news on the inflation front,'' said Gordon B. Pye, the Irving Trust Company's top economist. The declining dollar, he suggested, might be starting to raise the price of imported goods.

The index for finished energy goods fell two-tenths of 1 percent, the fifth consecutive monthly decline. Gasoline and natural gas fell while home hearing oil and lubricants rose.

The index of goods at the intermediate stage of production rose one-tenth of 1 percent after remaining unchanged in September.

John M. Albertine, president of the American Business Conference, a trade group, also expressed some fears of revived inflation.

''I think our honeymoon with stable food prices is over,'' he said. ''While I foresee no return to double-digit inflation, I don't think we will be able to take low inflation for granted next year. I believe we will break the 5 percent and maybe even the 6 percent barrier in 1986.''
