TITLE: FUTURES/OPTIONS; SOYBEANS FALL SHARPLY; LOAN RATE CUT STUDIED
DATE: 1985-11-16
PUBLICATION: The New York Times
LANGUAGE: ENGLISH
SECTION: Section 1; Page 44, Column 5; Financial Desk
EDITION: 
LENGTH: 528 words
DATE: 1985-11-16
SEARCH_ID: 14
Soybean futures prices fell sharply yesterday as Congress took a hard look at lowering the loan rate for soybeans under a plan suggested by an association of soybean farmers.

Weakness in the soybean pit drove corn prices down as well, but wheat prices shook off the pressure and posted a surprising rally. Soybeans came under pressure once again from growing anticipation that the Government will lower the loan rate for soybeans when it passes a new farm bill, according to Bob Lekberg, a grain analyst in Chicago with Shearson Lehman Brothers.

The American Soybean Association proposed such a plan, asking that the Agriculture Department lend farmers $4 a bushel for soybeans they put in the reserve program rather than the $5.02 currently paid. The plan also asks for direct cash payments to farmers to offset the lower loan rate. The cash payments, beginning at $50 an acre, would be phased out over a five-year period.

Soybean oil and meal were lower as well yesterday, as European buyers have filled their needs for the remainder of the year, Mr. Lekberg said.

Corn prices came under slight pressure from an increase in farmer sales on cash markets, although spillover pressure from the soybean pit appeared to be a more important factor, analysts said.

Wheat prices were lower early, but posted a surprising rally late in the session. Speculators appeared to be the major buyers, although the Government reported after the close that it would offer the Phillipines wheat under the export bonus program.

Livestock and meat prices were broadly lower on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange.

Weakness in the beef market stemmed from a lack of demand from retailers, according to Charlie Richardson, a livestock analyst in Denver with Lind-Waldock. Mr. Richardson said retailers were discouraged from buying because prices have advanced sharply in recent weeks.

In addition, he said, grocers see little reason to build inventories with the Thanksgiving holiday near.

Traders also believe that a Government report due out next week will show a sharp rise in the number of cattle on feedlots, analysts said.

Hog prices fell despite higher prices on wholesale cash markets. Traders expect demand for hogs to slip next week, as the slaughter was large this week.

Wholesale pork prices also came under pressure, they said.

Pork bellies fell as stored supplies continued to accumulate at a rapid pace, Mr. Richardson said.

Analysts said much of the selling came from traders who follow trends on price charts.

Precious metals prices were slightly lower in light trading on the Commodity Exchange in New York. No Coffee Halt Seen LONDON, Nov. 15 (Reuters) -Coffee supplies from Colombia, the world's second-largest producer, will not be affected by Wednesday's deadly volcano eruption, coffee industry officials and growers said today. Nestor Osorio, Colombia's delegate to the International Coffee Organization in London, said the area affected by the eruption was on the other side of the mountain from the region where coffee is grown. Plantations suffered no damage and the main roads linking the coffee-producing areas to the ports were open, he said.
