TITLE: HOW CAN REAGAN FACE THE INDOCHINA P.O.W.'S
DATE: 1985-11-16
PUBLICATION: The New York Times
LANGUAGE: ENGLISH
SECTION: Section 1; Page 27, Column 2; Editorial Desk
DATELINE: WESTBURY, N.Y.
EDITION: 
LENGTH: 686 words
DATE: 1985-11-16
TYPE: Op-ed
SEARCH_ID: 15
Ten years ago, Representative G.V. (Sonny) Montgomery headed a Congressional commission charged with determining whether American prisoners of war were being held captive in Indochina. The verdict: No P.O.W.'s were alive there. The other day, Mr. Montgomery admitted that, amid new reports of sightings of Americans imprisoned in Vietnam and Laos, doubt has crept into his mind. ''This is the issue that won't go away,'' he said.

One reason for the increase in news about servicemen being held against their will in Laos and Vietnam is a series of comments by Robert C. MacFarlane, President Reagan's national security adviser. In response to a question about his views on whether there are P.O.W.'s alive in Indochina, he said, ''There have to be live Americans there.''Asked what the Administration was doing, he replied: ''I wouldn't pretend to you that we've done enough to even start. And that's bad and that's a failure.''

Needless to say, Mr. MacFarlane's revelations shocked families of the missing men because they directly contradicted statements by the President. On Jan. 29, 1983, President Reagan, addressing the National League of Families of Prisoners of War and Missing in Action in Southeast Asia, said: ''Your long vigil is over. The intelligence assets of the United States are fully focused on this issue.'' Later that year, he said, ''The P.O.W. issue is the highest national priority of this Administration.''

Not only do Mr. MacFarlane's comments contradict those statements, they again point out what many P.O.W. families and others, myself included, have long suspected: P.O.W.'s are alive in Laos and Vietnam. Our Government knows this. And it isn't doing everything possible to recover them.

There is other evidence of neglect. For example, Jeane J. Kirkpatrick who, for four years as chief delegate to the United Nations also served as a member of the Cabinet and National Security Council, said the P.O.W. issue was never once raised in any White House meeting she attended. Does this sound like ''the highest national priority''?

If the Administration is doing everything possible, why isn't a Cabinet secretary instead of an Army lieutenant colonel running day-to-day supervision of all P.O.W.-related activities?

Many reports at both the Pentagon and Central Intelligence Agency that I have read describe similar scenes: P.O.W.'s, mostly pilots who are also officers, are being held in small groups. They are chained together at night while they sleep in bamboo cages and are forced by the Vietnamese to do slave labor.

The Vietnamese are holding these men because of an unfulfilled pledge made in 1973 by President Richard M. Nixon and his national security adviser, Henry A. Kissinger, to pay Hanoi $3.25 billion in reparations. (Mr. MacFarlane was a member of Mr. Kissinger's staff during the negotiations.) Ever since then, Hanoi has made it clear the prisoners of war will be ''found'' only after the United States compensates Vietnam for war damages.

Twice this year, Americans have been held hostage. Both the Achille Lauro and Trans World Airlines hijackings showed our Government ''fully focused'' on recovering the captives alive as soon as possible. Both incidents demonstrated our national belief that every human is special. Why should it be different for servicemen? We are all familiar with President Reagan's intimate involvement in the planning and capture of the Achille Lauro hijackers. Can't we expect the same personal involvement in bringing the P.O.W.'s home?

Mr. Reagan has difficult questions to answer: Do you really care about the P.O.W's? If so, why are so many wives, mothers, sons and daughters of these prisoners convinced that you are not in charge? Most of all, what will you tell these men when they come home? Will you be able to look them in the eye, after five years as President, and say you did everything possible to bring them home - especially after your chief foreign policy adviser says you're not?

I hope that President Reagan understands that ''the issue that won't go away'' won't go away until all the P.O.W.'s come home.
