TITLE: LAST-MINUTE PROBLEM DELAYS TEST OF 50 NEW CARS ON IRT FOR WEEK
DATE: 1985-11-16
PUBLICATION: The New York Times
LANGUAGE: ENGLISH
SECTION: Section 1; Page 31, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk
EDITION: 
LENGTH: 384 words
DATE: 1985-11-16
SEARCH_ID: 16
It's off again for those sleek, silver, on-again, off-again Bombardier subway cars that delighted riders of the 7th Avenue IRT local briefly this year.

A monthlong test of 50 of the newly overhauled subway cars, scheduled to begin yesterday, has been put off until Friday at the request of Bombardier Inc., their Canadian manufacturer.

Officials at Westinghouse, makers of the cars' electrical systems, said the delay was needed to make a ''minor adjustment'' in what they referred to as the propulsion-control equipment. The officials said the problem was discovered during a test Wednesday.

After meeting with officials of Bombardier yesterday, the president of the Transit Authority, David L. Gunn, said he was granting the extension.

Problems From the Start

''We made the request of them that they guarantee us that the 22d or earlier was a date by which they could have the cars in safe, reliable shape, and demonstrate that they had met the contract specifications,'' Mr. Gunn said. ''Based on the manufacturer's formal assurances, I said 'I will be reasonable and give you the extension.' ''

The $780 million contract for 825 of the cars, known as R-62A's, is the single largest purchase of subway cars in the authority's history. The cars are virtually identical to those built by Kawasaki, a Japanese manufacturer, which are in use on the Lexington IRT express.

There have been problems with the Bombardier cars from the start. Some of the first 40 cars put in service this year developed problems with the links between the coupler and the car bodies. These cars were taken out of service last summer and the authority refused to accept delivery of any more until the problems were solved.

Could Cause a Short

The problem that has now developed requires a ''minor modification to an electrical sub-assembly in the propulsion-control equipment,'' according to Ronald Hart, a spokesman for Westinghouse.

Mr. Gunn said that, while the modifications might be minor, a malfunction could cause a ''very serious problem.'' He said that a fire in the control box could cause ''one hell of a short.''

''We worry about those more than any other kind of fire,'' he said. ''They had a panel short out when they tested it and while it wasn't a serious fire, the potential is there.''
