TITLE: ARMED MEN DELAY EVICTION OF A GEORGIA FARMER
DATE: 1985-11-16
PUBLICATION: The New York Times
LANGUAGE: ENGLISH
SECTION: Section 1; Page 9, Column 3; National Desk
DATELINE: COCHRAN, Ga., Nov. 16
EDITION: 
LENGTH: 759 words
DATE: 1985-11-16
SEARCH_ID: 2
Armed men vowing to block the eviction of a debt-ridden farmer ended their daylong standoff tonight when the local sheriff agreed to postpone the eviction pending a new challenge to foreclosure proceedings against the farmer.

Alvin McDougald, an attorney for the farmer, Oscar Lorick, said a suit challenging the foreclosure would be filed Monday in Federal District Court in Macon. The Bleckley County Sheriff, Ed Coley, said he would give Mr. Lorick whatever time he needed to reach some resolution of his debts.

''We never wanted a physical confrontation,'' said Mr. McDougald. ''But we hope this will send the President and Congress a message about the problems facing farmers. There will be more Mr. Loricks.''

The armed men had set up barriers around the Lorick house.

The protesters included several local farmers as well as adherents of a right-wing group that is based in Oklahoma. The group advocates resistance to foreclosures.

Dispute Over $96,000 Debt

The dispute stems from actions by a Bleckley County bank to foreclose on Mr. Lorick, who says his family has worked the 80-acre farm in central Georgia for 119 years. Mr. Lorick owes the bank $96,000, and has failed in several efforts to block the foreclosure.

''There is nothing I could do myself, so I'm glad they come to help me,'' said Mr. Lorick, who is 66 years old and can neither read nor write. ''Farm work is all I've ever done and I'm too old now to leave and get a job.''

Tommy Kersey, a farmer from nearby Unadilla who organized the protest, and other protesters said they would resist any attempt by the authorities to force Mr. Lorick from his land. They said their action today was also calculated to focus public attention on the plight of American farmers and ''to send a message to Washington.''

Support From Oklahoma Group

The action had been planned for at least the last two and a half weeks, said Lawrence L. Humphreys, who is the founder and head of the Heritage Library, a group based in Velma, Okla. Among other things, the group argues that banks have no authority to foreclose on property and advocates resistance to such proceedings.

Mr. Humphreys and three of his associates came to Georgia from Oklahoma to help organize today's protest. Mr. Kersey said that farmers came from at least seven states to take part in the protest.

The men erected barriers of hay and rope around the edge of the property, and draped large, hand-painted signs over outbuildings, protesting the foreclosure.

''Oscar stays. Banks Go. Down With the Federal Reserve,'' read one of the banners, easily visible from U.S. 129, which fronts on Mr. Lorick's property.

Fight Featured in Magazine

Scores of spectators watched from cars parked along the edge of the road, while a dozen armed men, some of them wearing camouflage hunting outfits and carrying semi-automatic rifles, stood in groups near Mr. Lorick's sand-colored brick ranch house, about five miles southwest of this town of about 5,000 people. No police officers were anywhere in sight. At one point, the men took target practice, using haybales as targets.

Mr. Lorick's fight against foreclosure has drawn attention before. He was one of five farmers whose debt problems were a subject of an article in People magazine in September.

Charles F. Wittenstein, the Southern counsel for the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith, today described the Heritage Library as a right-wing organization that espouses anti-Semitic views. He said it had close ties to other right-wing, paramilitary organizations, like the Aryan Nations and the Covenant, the Sword and the Arm of the Lord.

Mr. Humpheys said he has been active in advocating resistance to bank foreclosures, based on his organization's interpretation of the law and the Bible. Among other things, he advocates that the Government move to forgive farmers' debts.

N.A.A.C.P. Aide Disagrees

Earlier, Sheriff Coley said he feared that Mr. Lorick, who is black, was being used by the mostly white group of protestors and that they did not have his best interests at heart.

But Mr. Kersey said race was irrelevant. ''This is a problem that affects everybody.''

James Lingo, an offficial with the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People said he disagreed completely with the protesters' approach. ''It should be done legally,'' he said.

The protest drew sharp and angry reactions in Cochran, where many local residents said they resented outsiders coming in to their community and threatening people with weapons.
