TITLE: RID US OF THE CONTRAS, FARMERS IN HONDURAS ASK
DATE: 1985-11-16
GRAPHIC: Photo of Pedro Echeverria Garcis (NYT/Jame LeMoyne)
PUBLICATION: The New York Times
LANGUAGE: ENGLISH
SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk
DATELINE: CIFUENTES, Honduras, Nov. 9
EDITION: 
LENGTH: 1172 words
DATE: 1985-11-16
SEARCH_ID: 3
The Reagan Administration and some members of the Honduran Government often portray the Nicaraguan guerrilla army massed near this border town as a necessary buffer and a legitimate weapon against the Sandinista Government in Managua.

But the Honduran coffee farmers who cut a hardscrabble existence out of the mountain valleys that stretch along the isolated frontier have a different view. They say the Nicaraguan rebels gathered in nearby camps represent a physical menace that has brought them economic ruin.

After enduring the guerrillas' growing presence for the last four years, the farmers have decided to make their displeasure public. Two weeks ago, they sent a delegation to protest to the United States Embassy and to the Honduran Congress. They say they want the rebels to clear out.

''They have forced a war on us that doesn't interest us, that kills us in the face of the indifference of our Government,'' Wilfredo Castellanos, vice president of the coffee producers association, said in a public appeal printed in the Honduran press last week.

Sandinistas Also Accused

The farmers of the coffee associations in Danli and El Paraiso, towns near the border with Nicaragua, contended in a day of interviews that abuses by the rebels, Sandinista artillery barrages and mined roadways had terrified local residents and made it almost impossible to harvest the coffee beans, now ripening to a bright cherry red, that sustain the region's economic life.

There may be an element of gamesmanship in their protest, for while the presence of the contras, as the rebels are known, seems to have made life especially hard, coffee growers all over Honduras are suffering an economic recesssion.

But the farmers appear to be unlikely political activists. They describe themselves as traditional conservatives who deeply admire the United States and distrust the Sandinista Government in Nicaragua.

''At first we gave the contras a good reception,'' said a farmer from Cifuentes. ''But then they direspected us and our sovereignty. They have no respect.''

Several local growers shared their views with a reporter, but they asked that their names not be used for fear of retribution. Most said they owned 20 to 60 acres of coffee bushes.

Farming Areas Abandoned

Several farmers said rebel clashes with the Sandinistas had forced Hondurans to abandon the farming communities of Tapalchi, Poza Redonda, Pueblo Nuevo, Boqueron, Los Mieles, El Bosque, Quebrada del Oro and Maquenales along the northeastern Nicaraguan border.

Guerrilla camps dot the region, the farmers said, stretching from the hamlets of La Lodosa, just outside El Paraiso, up north past the dirt-laned villages of Las Trojes and Arenales, wide spots in the road to outsiders but home to the local coffee growers.

Sandinista units carried out sustained bombardment of the area twice this year, killing several residents, the farmers said. The Sandinistas have also stolen livestock and crops and may have mined some border lanes and villages, they added.

But more than a dozen coffee farmers from Cifuentes, Las Trojes, El Paraiso and Danli contended that although local people were afraid of the Sandinistas, they were perhaps more afraid of the Nicaraguan rebels, who they described as poorly trained, undisciplined and violent.

''We have had it to the limit with these people,'' a farmer said, speaking of the rebels. ''They are coldblooded killers.''

Farmer's Home Raided

The farmers said that the Honduran Army had imposed stricter control over the rebels in the last year, but that the guerrillas had run the area as warlords and were still feared.

Pedro Echeverria Garcia, a 70-year-old farmer from near Cifuentes, said informers had told the Nicaraguan rebels that he was a Sandinista spy. His son also had problems with the rebels, according to other farmers.

Last Nov. 29, Mr. Echeverria said, armed men burst into his wooden farmhouse at night and opened fire. They killed his wife, Gregoria Pereira Escobar, 45 years old, and narrowly missed him as he jumped out a window. Mr. Echeverria accuses the guerrillas of carrying out the attack, even though he says he cannot prove it.

''They came to kill me,'' he said in an interview, ''but God is strong. I did not die. But they have killed my wife.''

Four local farmers said the rebels had killed four residents of Cifuentes since 1980 on suspicion of being Sandinista spies. They said the four were Lisandro Zuniga, Tonio Duarte, Gerardo Ochoa and Mr. Echeverria's wife. #4 in Family Reported Slain They added that rebels killed four members of the family of Jesus Martinez in nearby Los Planes three years ago in order to rape two of his daughters. This week a Nicaraguan named Santo Gonzalez Lopez killed a Honduran friend, Andrea Alvarado, in a nearby village using a hand grenade, according to the military police in Danli.

Another farmer said that when residents tried to restrain a rebel who got drunk last year in the hamlet of La Lodosa, the rebel brushed them off, shouting, ''We are supported by Ronald Reagan and we can do what we want!''

Several coffee growers said they believed the Sandinistas would stop assaulting the area if the guerrillas were removed.

''Why don't they take these men away?'' one farmer said. ''Then we'll see if the Sandinistas still attack us. If they do, then give us guns and we can act ourselves.''

The farmers said they were aware that the Sandinistas might one day try to infiltrate the area and even attack Honduras. But as they drifted away to eat barbecued beef and rice with garlic, one said: ''They say the Communists will come here and that may be. But if that is so, why don't they do something for the poor peasants so that the Communists cannot come?''

Farmers Deeply in Debt

According to Antonio Erazo, president of the producers association in Danli, more than 500 local coffee farmers have suffered economically from the war. All local farmers are deeply in debt, he said, and cannot sell their land to move farther from the border because nobody will buy a farm in a war zone.

A farmer who gave his first name as Omar said that he was $28,000 in debt because rebel and that Sandinista fire fights had made it difficult to harvest most of his coffee crop for the last three years. Coffee pickers do not want to work in the war zone, he said, and those who do ask double the normal daily wage of $2.50 a day.

Mr. Erazo said that the coffee growers were thinking of writing a letter of protest to the United States Senate but that they did not have the address.

''We as coffee growers admire President Reagan,'' a local coffee association official said. ''But now he is hurting us. How would you like to have these guerrillas in New York?''

A spokesman for the United States Embassy in Honduras said American officials had listened to the farmers' appeal and hoped to be able to provide some economic help to them.

''Not because of the contras,'' he said, ''but because these people have a problem.''
