TITLE: ANSWERS TO QUIZ
DATE: 1985-11-16
PUBLICATION: The New York Times
LANGUAGE: ENGLISH
EDITION: 
LENGTH: 394 words
DATE: 1985-11-16
TYPE: Question
SEARCH_ID: 5
Questions appear on page 17. 1. The portrait of the Princess was created with 10,000 jellybeans. 2. The collapse of Israel's national unity Cabinet was averted when Prime Minister Shimon Peres withdrew his threat to dismiss Ariel Sharon, the Minister of Industry and Commerce, after Mr. Sharon added ''clarifications'' to an apology for accusatiions he had made against Mr. Peres. 3. Homeless people will be removed from the streets on freezing nights this winter and taken to shelters or hospitals, whether or not they are willing to go. 4. Observers can find Halley's comet on clear, dark nights about 9 P.M. by aiming their binoculars at the Pleiades, a prominent cluster of stars high above the eastern horizon. 5. Police Commissioner Gregore J. Sambore, who directed the bombing from a helicopter of the group's headquarters, resigned. 6. Employing his brash strategy, Gary Kasparov succeeded in wresting the world chess championship from Anatoly Karpov. 7. Many airlines are offering steep discount fares to encourage travel on Thanksgiving weekend. 8. Bret Saberhagen of the Kansas City Royals, 21 years old, won the Cy Young Award as best pitcher in the American League, and Dwight Gooden of the Mets, three days short of his 21st birthday, became the youngest pitcher to win the Cy Young Award. 9. The eruption of the Nevada del Ruiz volcano in northern Colombia caused a devastatingly fast and huge avalanche of mud, known by the geological term lahar. 10. To cook the potatoes, the chains use beef fat, which is high in the saturated fats that researchers say can contribute to heart disease. 11. Bison will be shot to prevent them from transmitting to local livestock brucellosis, a disease with which the herd is infected. 12. 5. 13. Mexico. 14. Mr. Reagan sent a message to a United Nations conference saying he would support any move to repeal the General Assembly resolution, which equated Zionism with racism. 15. Declined. 16. The teams, both of which have 7-3 records, are off to their best collective start since the Jets were founded in 1960, as the Titans. 17. True. 18. The Haymarket riot and bombing in Chicago in 1886. 19. The investment is in occupied apartments whose tenants, many of them elderly single people, who are entitled to keep their homes at regulated rents, and the gamble is when they will move out - or die. 20. Canton.
