TITLE: TH ULSTER PACT: BIG HOPES, BIG RISKS
DATE: 1985-11-16
GRAPHIC: Photo of the Rev. Ian Paisley outside Hillsborough Courthouse (Reuters)
PUBLICATION: The New York Times
LANGUAGE: ENGLISH
SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk
DATELINE: HILLSBOROUGH, Northern Ireland, Nov. 15
EDITION: 
LENGTH: 764 words
DATE: 1985-11-16
TYPE: Analysis
SEARCH_ID: 7
The agreement between the British and Irish Governments to give Dublin a voice in the affairs of Northern Ireland is both risky and fragile.

Both Governments say they see it as a chance to break what Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher today called the ''cycle of violence'' in a place that, since 1969, has known little else.

The agreement is designed to help the Roman Catholics in Northern Ireland, who are overwhelmingly nationalist, gain a measure of power and influence, to restore their confidence in the province's institutions and to erode their support for the Irish Republican Army.

This would make life safer for the members of the security forces who are the prime targets of the I.R.A. and who are overwhelmingly drawn from the Protestant unionist majority.

Risks Are Great for 2

Most of the political risks have been taken by Prime Minister Garret FitzGerald of Ireland, who is in a relatively weak political position at home, and by John Hume, the Londonderry politician who represents northern nationalists who say they believe they can achieve their goals peacefully.

If the agreement proves unworkable, the Government of Mr. FitzGerald, already trailing in public-opinion polls because of high taxes and unemployment, could fall. If the lives of the northern nationalists fail to improve, Mr. Hume could lose ground to the Sinn Fein, the political arm of the I.R.A., which says it believes that justice for nationalists is possible only in a united Ireland and that this will eventually be won by force of arms.

Mrs. Thatcher is in a strong political position at home, but in her efforts to stop the violence in Northern Ireland, where the bloodshed is at its lowest level in years, she has also risked a backlash and an upturn in violence.

Although unionists, who say they are prepared to fight to stay British, are accusing Mrs. Thatcher of treachery and warning of dire consequences, the Protestant paramilitary groups who would provide their firepower are still undecided as to what, if anything, to do. For its part, the I.R.A. seems to be operating as usual. Today, it exploded a land mine and killed a policeman near the border, in South Armagh.

Irish unity is a deeply felt, if sometimes latent, goal in Irish politics, enshrined in the Irish Constitution, which claims sovereignty over the entire island. Today, Mr. FitzGerald reminded Mrs. Thatcher that they had come to the table with ''different land titles'' to Northern Ireland.

Nonetheless, in the accord signed today, the Irish Government formally recognized, in a document that will be registered with the United Nations, that a united Ireland can come about only with the consent of the majority of the people of Northern Ireland, who now want no change.

Gamble by FitzGerald

Mr. FitzGerald has gambled, in the face of cries of ''sellout,'' that he can defer the presently unattainable goal of Irish unity in exchange for an immediate improvement in the lives of northern nationalists.

The last British Prime Minister to negotiate with the Irish, Edward Heath, had other difficulties on his mind at the time: Britain's entry to the European Economic Community and disastrous strikes in transport and industry. In 1973, Mr. Heath agreed with the Irish to set up a Council of Ireland, but the proposal died under pressure from a vast unionist strike.

Mrs. Thatcher, who has a huge majority in Parliament, has shown herself tough and resolute so far under the unionists' verbal onslaught.

Warned in the House of Commons on Thursday by Enoch Powell, a Unionist member from Northern Ireland, that ''the penalty for treachery is to fall into public contempt,'' she said she found his comments ''deeply offensive.''

Mr. Hume and other members of his constitutional nationalist Social Democratic and Labor Party made it clear at the party's annual conference in Belfast last weekend that the accord would stand or fall on how it affects the lives of Catholics in the north. Many of these complain of discrimination by the unionists and unfair treatment by the security forces, who they say often treat them as if they belong to the I.R.A. whether or not they do.

Mr. Hume and Mr. FitzGerald say they see the agreement as part of a ''process'' in which nationalists, treted as equals, can improve their relations with the unionists with whom they share their island.

Mrs. Thatcher, who also hopes for reconciliation, says she sees the agreement as paving the way to move the Government in Northern Ireland, now run from London, back to Belfast, where she thinks it belongs.
