TITLE: BRITAIN AND IRELAND SIGN ACCORD THAT GIVES DUBLIN ROLE IN ULSTER
DATE: 1985-11-16
GRAPHIC: Photo of Prime Ministers Garet FitzGerald and Margaret Thatcher (Agence France-Presse)
PUBLICATION: The New York Times
LANGUAGE: ENGLISH
SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk
DATELINE: HILLSBOROUGH, Northern Ireland, Nov. 15
EDITION: 
LENGTH: 1068 words
DATE: 1985-11-16
SEARCH_ID: 8
Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher signed a treaty here today giving the Irish Republic a formal consultative role and official presence in this province, long a sectarian battleground. It was the first such arrangement since Ireland's partition 65 years ago.

Under the potentially far-reaching accord, the Dublin Government is given a mechanism for pressing its views on virtually all matters touching the Roman Catholicminority here, including the security policies of the army and the police, the administration of justice and prisons.

This is to be done through a joint secretariat of Irish and British officials to be set up here, officials said, within a matter of weeks to serve a ''conference'' of Cabinet ministers from the two countries that will be more or less permanently in session to discuss sensitive issues and matters of policy.

A Subtly Balanced Arrangement

The primary objective of the subtly balanced and possibly fragile arrangement is to ease the minority's sense of alienation from the local government without provoking a violent Protestant backlash.

Garret FitzGerald, the Irish Prime Minister, whose mere presence here was taken as a provocation by Protestants protesting outside the castle where the signing took place, said he hoped that the willingness of Catholics to tolerate the terrorist activities of the Irish Republican Army would be ''eroded'' once the accord began to take effect.

In the treaty as well as his statement at a news conference, Dr. FitzGerald formally conceded that the Protestant majority of the province rejects the nationalist goal of Ireland's unification. The agreement he signed provided that Northern Ireland would remain British until a majority of its inhabitants freely consent to a change.

'I Believe in the Union'

In present or foreseeable circumstances, that means indefinitely - a point Mrs. Thatcher was careful to stress. Sitting alongside her Irish counterpart beneath a painting of Windsor Castle, she said:

''I want to offer hope to young people particularly that the cycle of violence and conflict can be broken. I believe in the union and that it will last so long as the majority so wish.''

She meant the union of Britain with Northern Ireland and the majority here. Irish nationalists have traditionally argued that the majority that needed to be heard on the question of partition was the majority of Ireland as a whole.

Repeatedly the British Prime Minister characterized herself as a ''unionist'' and ''loyalist'' - terms that are the focus for the political identity of Protestants in the province - and insisted that the new arrangement would involve no sacrifice of British sovereignty.

Protestants Promise Resistance

But Protestant leaders, who see any involvement by Dublin in the province's affairs as a retreat threatening eventual Catholic domination, were quick to promise boycotts and resistance.

The Rev. Ian Paisley, a loyalist stalwart who sits in the House of Commons in London, denounced Mrs. Thatcher from the steps of the Hillsborough courthouse as a ''quisling'' who was conspiring with a ''foreign Government that protects the murderers of our people.''

From the balcony of the local council chamber nearby a banner had been hung proclaiming a single word, ''Betrayal.'' Even before Mr. Paisley spoke, the tricolor flag of the Irish Republic had been burned on the balcony. Partisans of the Unionist cause brandished placards that said, ''Loyalists Awake'' and ''No Pope Here.''

The Protestant majority accounts for more than 90 percent of the Royal Ulster Constabulary and the Ulster Defense Regiment, the police and home guard army units operating in the province. Protestants are organized into extralegal armed militias such as the Ulster Defense Association, whose potential for violence is taken seriously. #2,500 Dead in 16 Years The Protestant militias have been responsible for many fewer deaths than the Irish Republican Army among the 2,500 people killed in more than 43,000 incidents of shooting, bombing and arson in the last 16 years, in part because it has generally been possible for the militias to regard themselves as being on the same side as the security forces.

This morning, near the village of Crossmaglen in South Armagh, a member of the constabulary was killed in a land mine explosion. A key advantage of the British-Irish accord from the British standpoint is that it commits the authorities in Dublin to closer cooperation on a cross-border basis in incidents such as that.

Balanced against Dublin's security commitment is a British willingness to consider the possibility of mixed courts involving judges from the Irish Republic, as well as a possible bill of rights for Northern Ireland, to respond to the sense of vulnerability of Catholics and nationalists - the terms are virtually interchangable here - who make up nearly 40 percent of the province's population of about 1.6 million.

The initial mechanism of cooperation, after approval by the two Parliaments, will be the ''intergovernmental conference'' in which a member of the Irish Cabinet, designated as the Permanent Ministerial Representative, will meet regularly with the Secretary for Northern Ireland, the top British official in the province. Mrs. Thatcher said the new British-Irish secretariat would be located in Belfast unless security considerations made that impossible. ----Reagan and O'Neill Hail Pact WASHINGTON, Nov. 15 - President Reagan hailed the accord today as ''a promise of peace.''

Mr. Reagan's comments were delivered in a bipartisan show of support at the White House, where the House Speaker, Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., also complimented the British and Irish Governments for taking the ''important'' and ''courageous'' step of constructing a framework for peace and reconciliation in Northern Ireland.

''We're delighted that this has come about, and we hope that, in a bipartisan way, that we can go forward with anything we can do to help in restoring sound economics there and anything we can do to encourage private investment that will provide prosperity and employment for their people,'' Mr. Reagan said at a White House photo session with the Speaker.

Mr. Reagan and Mr. O'Neill, who are both of Irish ancestry, cited in separate statements the difficulty of bringing peace to Northern Ireland, but said the accord reflected a desire for progress.
