TITLE: NEWS SUMMARY: SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 16, 1985
DATE: 1985-11-16
PUBLICATION: The New York Times
LANGUAGE: ENGLISH
EDITION: 
LENGTH: 843 words
DATE: 1985-11-16
TYPE: Summary
SEARCH_ID: 9
International

21,559 people were dead or missing in Armero, Colombia, and other villages and towns in the area of the Nevada del Ruiz volcano mudslide, Government officials announced as rescue operations began. In addition to the destruction of Armero, 13 communities were severely damaged. [Page 1, Column 6.]

A hospital roof provided high ground for survivors of the torrent of mud that covered Armero. Benjamin Rojas, whose family was buried in the mud, was marooned for two days on the roof with about 30 others before rescue helicopters came, but 30 doctors, nurses and patients were entombed in the mud below. [1:4.]

No agreement in Geneva on two aspects of arms control was urged on President Reagan in a letter from Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger. He asked Mr. Reagan to avoid any pact involving a commitment to abide by the 1979 arms treaty, or one that would place limits on research and testing of a space-based missile defense system. [1:3.]

President Reagan is prepared to make a joint appearance and issue separate statements with Mikhail S. Gorbachev at the conclusion of the summit meeting in Geneva next week if it yields positive results, White House officials said. [6:1.]

A British-Irish treaty signed by Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher gives the Irish Republic a formal consultative role and an official presence in Northern Ireland. The treaty enables the Dublin Government to press its views on virtually all matters affecting Northern Ireland's Roman Catholic minority [1:1.]

Soviet exit visas are to be given to some of the spouses of American citizens who have been denied permission to leave the Soviet Union for years, the Soviet Union told the United States. A State Department official said the Foreign Ministry in Moscow gave the United States Embassy a list of nine names, about one-third of the long-separated spouses in the Soviet Union. [1:2.]

The arrest of a top Nazi in Argentina was reported by Argentine officials, who said he will be sent to West Germany, which issued a special extradition warrant. He was identified as Walter Kutschmann, a 71-year-old businessman who had lived in Argentina since 1947 under the name Pedro Ricardo Olmo. [3:3.]

National

Armed men blocked the eviction of a Georgia farmer by surrounding his house to protest foreclosure procedures against him. The men included several local farmers and adherents of a right-wing group that is based in Oklahoma and advocates resistance to bank foreclosures. The local sheriff said he was delaying the eviction of Oscar Lorick, owner of the 80-acre farm in Bleckley County. [9:3.]

White House officials were assured by Defense Secretary Weinberger that he was not seeking to undercut President Reagan on legislation to balance the Federal budget. He made the assurances as some senior White House aides said there was growing resentment over his statements on budget-balancing proposals. [12:3.]

Disciplinary action was suggested for the structural engineers of the Hyatt Regency Hotel in Kansas City, Mo. A judge said they were responsible for the 1981 collapse of two suspended lobby walkways that caused the death of 114 people. He found Jack Gillum and Dan Duncan of G.C.E. International Inc. guilty of ''gross negligence, misconduct, and unprofessional conduct.'' [28:1.]

Metropolitan

NBC is to move its headquarters from Rockefeller Center, where the network has been a tenant for more than 50 years. Its officials said the company needed more space and more modern studios and that several sites in Manhattan and at least one in New Jersey were being considered. [1:1.]

Elizabeth Holtzman will not seek the Democratic nomination for the Senate next year. Miss Holtzman, the Brooklyn District Attorney, said it would be difficult to raise adequate funds to challenge Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, the Republican incumbent. Her announcement virtually assured Geraldine A. Ferraro of the nomination if she seeks it. [29:1.]

A financially troubled casino in Atlantic City is seeking protection from its creditors in the Federal bankruptcy court. The casino, formerly operated by Playboy and renamed Atlantis when Playboy was sold to the Elsinore Corporation, is unable to meet interest payments to its mortgage bond holders. [30:5.]

Two slain children, a brother and sister, were found in the basement of the rooming house in Plainfield, N.J., where they lived with their mother. They were identified as Tyrone Urquhart, 8-years old, and Tina, his sister, who was 7. [30:5.]

A 1986 Westchester County budget of $721.2 million was submitted by County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke to the county Board of Legislators. The proposed budget calls for a property-tax rate 22.2 percent higher than three years ago, and 11.1 percent more than in 1985. [30:1.]

Homosexuals vented frustration at a demonstration outside City Hall and at a hearing inside over what they said was growing discrimination and hysteria generated by the fear of AIDS. [31:1.]
